docs/FRONTEND_DEVELOPMENT_PLAN.md, before:

# 🎨 InTrades Frontend Development Plan

## 📋 Executive Summary

This document outlines the comprehensive plan for building the InTrades frontend application, integrating with the completed backend API, and deploying the full-stack application to production.

## 🎯 Project Goals

1. Create an engaging, mobile-first web application for skilled trades education
2. Implement gamification elements that motivate student engagement
3. Provide intuitive tools for instructors to manage courses and track progress
4. Deploy a production-ready application for pilot testing

## 🏗️ Technology Stack

### Core Technologies
- **Framework**: React 18+ with TypeScript
- **State Management**: Redux Toolkit with RTK Query
- **UI Library**: Material-UI v5 (MUI)
- **Routing**: React Router v6
- **Forms**: React Hook Form with Yup validation
- **Charts**: Chart.js with react-chartjs-2
- **Animation**: Framer Motion
- **Testing**: Jest, React Testing Library, Cypress

### Development Tools
- **Build Tool**: Vite (faster than Create React App)
- **Code Quality**: ESLint, Prettier, Husky
- **API Mocking**: MSW (Mock Service Worker)
- **Documentation**: Storybook

## 📅 Development Timeline (12 Weeks)

### Phase 1: Foundation (Weeks 1-2)
**Goal**: Set up development environment and core architecture

#### Week 1: Project Setup
- [ ] Initialize React app with Vite and TypeScript
- [ ] Configure Redux Toolkit and RTK Query
- [ ] Set up Material-UI theme and global styles
- [ ] Configure routing structure
- [ ] Set up development environment variables
- [ ] Create API service layer

#### Week 2: Authentication Flow
- [ ] Build login page with JWT integration
- [ ] Create registration form with validation
- [ ] Implement password reset flow
- [ ] Add token refresh mechanism
- [ ] Create protected route wrapper
- [ ] Build profile management page

### Phase 2: Student Experience (Weeks 3-6)
**Goal**: Complete student-facing features

#### Week 3: Student Dashboard
- [ ] Design and implement main dashboard layout
- [ ] Create XP progress bar component
- [ ] Build badge showcase grid
- [ ] Add recent activity feed
- [ ] Implement quick stats cards
- [ ] Create navigation menu

#### Week 4: Challenge System
- [ ] Build challenge list view with filters
- [ ] Create challenge detail page
- [ ] Implement quiz interface
- [ ] Build task submission form
- [ ] Add file upload component
- [ ] Create progress tracker

#### Week 5: Gamification Elements
- [ ] Design XP gain animations
- [ ] Create badge award modal
- [ ] Build tier progression display
- [ ] Implement streak counter
- [ ] Add leaderboard component
- [ ] Create achievement notifications

#### Week 6: Business Tracker
- [ ] Design milestone checklist UI
- [ ] Create interactive progress cards
- [ ] Build document upload interface
- [ ] Add completion certificates
- [ ] Implement progress visualization
- [ ] Create milestone celebration animations

### Phase 3: Instructor Features (Weeks 7-9)
**Goal**: Build instructor dashboard and management tools

#### Week 7: Instructor Dashboard
- [ ] Create instructor layout and navigation
- [ ] Build student roster view
- [ ] Add cohort management interface
- [ ] Create progress overview charts
- [ ] Implement notification center
- [ ] Add quick actions menu

#### Week 8: Challenge Management
- [ ] Build challenge creation form
- [ ] Create WYSIWYG content editor
- [ ] Add question builder for quizzes
- [ ] Implement rubric designer
- [ ] Create challenge scheduling interface
- [ ] Add bulk import/export features

#### Week 9: Grading & Analytics
- [ ] Design submission review interface
- [ ] Create grading workflow
- [ ] Build feedback system
- [ ] Implement analytics dashboard
- [ ] Add report generation
- [ ] Create grade export functionality

### Phase 4: Polish & Deployment (Weeks 10-12)
**Goal**: Optimize, test, and deploy to production

#### Week 10: Optimization & Testing
- [ ] Implement code splitting
- [ ] Add lazy loading for routes
- [ ] Optimize bundle size
- [ ] Write unit tests
- [ ] Create integration tests
- [ ] Perform accessibility audit

#### Week 11: Mobile & PWA
- [ ] Ensure responsive design
- [ ] Add PWA configuration
- [ ] Implement offline support
- [ ] Add push notifications
- [ ] Test on various devices
- [ ] Optimize for touch interactions

#### Week 12: Deployment
- [ ] Set up CI/CD pipeline
- [ ] Configure production environment
- [ ] Deploy to staging server
- [ ] Perform security audit
- [ ] Launch beta version
- [ ] Monitor and fix issues

## 🎨 UI/UX Design Specifications

### Design Principles
1. **Mobile-First**: Design for phones, scale to tablets/desktop
2. **Gamified**: Visual rewards, progress indicators, achievements
3. **Accessible**: WCAG 2.1 AA compliance
4. **Intuitive**: Clear navigation, minimal learning curve
5. **Engaging**: Animations, interactions, visual feedback

### Color Palette
```css
:root {
  /* Primary - Electric Blue (Electrician) */
  --primary-main: #2196F3;
  --primary-light: #64B5F6;
  --primary-dark: #1976D2;
  
  /* Secondary - Tool Orange */
  --secondary-main: #FF6B35;
  --secondary-light: #FF8F65;
  --secondary-dark: #E55100;
  
  /* Success - Money Green */
  --success-main: #4CAF50;
  --success-light: #81C784;
  --success-dark: #388E3C;
  
  /* XP Gold */
  --xp-gold: #FFD700;
  --xp-gold-light: #FFEB3B;
  --xp-gold-dark: #FFC107;
  
  /* Grays */
  --gray-50: #FAFAFA;
  --gray-100: #F5F5F5;
  --gray-200: #EEEEEE;
  --gray-300: #E0E0E0;
  --gray-400: #BDBDBD;
  --gray-500: #9E9E9E;
  --gray-600: #757575;
  --gray-700: #616161;
  --gray-800: #424242;
  --gray-900: #212121;
}
```

### Typography
- **Headings**: Bebas Neue or Oswald (bold, industrial feel)
- **Body**: Open Sans or Roboto (clean, readable)
- **Numbers**: Roboto Mono (XP, scores, stats)

### Component Library

#### Core Components
1. **XPBar**: Animated progress bar with milestone markers
2. **BadgeCard**: 3D flip animation on hover/earn
3. **ChallengeCard**: Status indicator, deadline, XP reward
4. **LeaderboardRow**: Rank, avatar, name, XP, trend
5. **MilestoneTracker**: Checkbox list with progress percentage
6. **NotificationToast**: Slide-in with action buttons
7. **AchievementModal**: Confetti animation with badge/XP display

## 🔄 State Management Schema

```typescript
interface AppState {
  auth: {
    user: User | null;
    token: string | null;
    refreshToken: string | null;
    isAuthenticated: boolean;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  challenges: {
    list: Challenge[];
    current: Challenge | null;
    submissions: Submission[];
    filters: ChallengeFilters;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  progression: {
    xp: number;
    level: number;
    tier: ProgressTier;
    badges: Badge[];
    streaks: StreakData;
    nextTierXP: number;
  };
  leaderboard: {
    weekly: LeaderboardEntry[];
    allTime: LeaderboardEntry[];
    userRank: number;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  ui: {
    theme: 'light' | 'dark';
    sidebarOpen: boolean;
    notifications: Notification[];
    modals: ModalState;
  };
}
```

## 📱 Mobile App Strategy

### Phase 1: Progressive Web App (Immediate)
- Install prompt on mobile browsers
- Offline support with service workers
- Push notifications
- Home screen icon
- Full-screen mode

### Phase 2: React Native (Future)
- Shared business logic with web
- Native navigation
- Platform-specific features
- App store distribution

## 🧪 Testing Strategy

### Unit Testing
- Components: 80% coverage target
- Redux reducers: 100% coverage
- Utility functions: 100% coverage
- API services: Mocked responses

### Integration Testing
- User flows: Login → Challenge → Submit
- Instructor flows: Create → Grade → Analytics
- Payment flows: Upgrade → Access

### E2E Testing
- Critical paths with Cypress
- Cross-browser testing
- Mobile device testing
- Performance testing

## 🚀 Deployment Architecture

### Staging Environment
- **Frontend**: Vercel or Netlify
- **Backend**: Heroku free tier
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas M0 (free)
- **Storage**: AWS S3 (free tier)

### Production Environment
- **Frontend**: AWS CloudFront + S3
- **Backend**: AWS ECS or Heroku
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas M10+
- **Storage**: AWS S3 with CloudFront
- **Monitoring**: New Relic or DataDog

## 📊 Success Metrics

### Technical KPIs
- Page load time < 2 seconds
- Time to Interactive < 3 seconds
- Lighthouse score > 90
- 0 critical security vulnerabilities
- 99.9% uptime

### User Engagement KPIs
- Daily Active Users (DAU)
- Challenge completion rate > 70%
- Average session duration > 10 minutes
- User retention rate > 60% (30 days)
- NPS score > 50

## 💰 Budget Estimate

### Development Costs
- Frontend Development: 480 hours @ $100/hr = $48,000
- UI/UX Design: 120 hours @ $80/hr = $9,600
- Testing & QA: 80 hours @ $70/hr = $5,600
- **Total Development**: $63,200

### Infrastructure Costs (Monthly)
- Hosting: $200
- Database: $100
- Storage: $50
- CDN: $50
- Monitoring: $100
- **Total Monthly**: $500

## 🎯 Immediate Next Steps

1. **Set up frontend repository**
   ```bash
   npx create-vite@latest intrades-frontend --template react-ts
   cd intrades-frontend
   npm install @reduxjs/toolkit react-redux @mui/material
   ```

2. **Create project structure**
   ```
   src/
   ├── components/
   ├── features/
   ├── pages/
   ├── services/
   ├── store/
   ├── styles/
   └── utils/
   ```

3. **Configure API connection**
   - Set up environment variables
   - Create API service layer
   - Implement auth interceptor

4. **Build first feature**
   - Start with authentication
   - Test with backend API
   - Deploy to staging

## 📚 Resources & Documentation

- [React Documentation](https://react.dev)
- [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org)
- [Material-UI](https://mui.com)
- [Backend API Docs](/docs/API_DOCUMENTATION.md)
- [Figma Designs](https://figma.com/intrades-designs)
- [User Stories](/docs/USER_STORIES.md)

## ✅ Definition of Done

A feature is complete when:
1. Code is written and reviewed
2. Unit tests pass with >80% coverage
3. Integration tests pass
4. Accessibility audit passes
5. Responsive on all screen sizes
6. Documented in Storybook
7. Deployed to staging
8. Product owner approves

---

## 🚦 Ready to Start!

The backend is complete and deployed. The frontend development can begin immediately. This plan provides a clear roadmap to launch the InTrades platform within 12 weeks.

**First Priority**: Set up the frontend repository and build the authentication flow to connect with the existing backend API.

Commit message:

docs: mark CloudFront CDN configured; add env examples and next steps

docs/FRONTEND_DEVELOPMENT_PLAN.md, after:

# 🎨 InTrades Frontend Development Plan

> Plan update (CDN): CloudFront distribution `d2mhpzh11d0f5l.cloudfront.net` has been created in us-east-1 and wired to S3 via OAC and a Trusted Key Group. Signed GETs are enabled in the app when `CLOUDFRONT_DOMAIN`, `CLOUDFRONT_KEY_PAIR_ID`, and `CLOUDFRONT_PRIVATE_KEY` are present.

## 📋 Executive Summary

This document outlines the comprehensive plan for building the InTrades frontend application, integrating with the completed backend API, and deploying the full-stack application to production.

## 🎯 Project Goals

1. Create an engaging, mobile-first web application for skilled trades education
2. Implement gamification elements that motivate student engagement
3. Provide intuitive tools for instructors to manage courses and track progress
4. Deploy a production-ready application for pilot testing

## 🏗️ Technology Stack

### Core Technologies
- **Framework**: React 18+ with TypeScript
- **State Management**: Redux Toolkit with RTK Query
- **UI Library**: Material-UI v5 (MUI)
- **Routing**: React Router v6
- **Forms**: React Hook Form with Yup validation
- **Charts**: Chart.js with react-chartjs-2
- **Animation**: Framer Motion
- **Testing**: Jest, React Testing Library, Cypress

### Development Tools
- **Build Tool**: Vite (faster than Create React App)
- **Code Quality**: ESLint, Prettier, Husky
- **API Mocking**: MSW (Mock Service Worker)
- **Documentation**: Storybook

## 📅 Development Timeline (12 Weeks)

### Phase 1: Foundation (Weeks 1-2)
**Goal**: Set up development environment and core architecture

#### Week 1: Project Setup
- [ ] Initialize React app with Vite and TypeScript
- [ ] Configure Redux Toolkit and RTK Query
- [ ] Set up Material-UI theme and global styles
- [ ] Configure routing structure
- [ ] Set up development environment variables
- [ ] Create API service layer

#### Week 2: Authentication Flow
- [ ] Build login page with JWT integration
- [ ] Create registration form with validation
- [ ] Implement password reset flow
- [ ] Add token refresh mechanism
- [ ] Create protected route wrapper
- [ ] Build profile management page

### Phase 2: Student Experience (Weeks 3-6)
**Goal**: Complete student-facing features

#### Week 3: Student Dashboard
- [ ] Design and implement main dashboard layout
- [ ] Create XP progress bar component
- [ ] Build badge showcase grid
- [ ] Add recent activity feed
- [ ] Implement quick stats cards
- [ ] Create navigation menu

#### Week 4: Challenge System
- [ ] Build challenge list view with filters
- [ ] Create challenge detail page
- [ ] Implement quiz interface
- [ ] Build task submission form
- [ ] Add file upload component
- [ ] Create progress tracker

#### Week 5: Gamification Elements
- [ ] Design XP gain animations
- [ ] Create badge award modal
- [ ] Build tier progression display
- [ ] Implement streak counter
- [ ] Add leaderboard component
- [ ] Create achievement notifications

#### Week 6: Business Tracker
- [ ] Design milestone checklist UI
- [ ] Create interactive progress cards
- [ ] Build document upload interface
- [ ] Add completion certificates
- [ ] Implement progress visualization
- [ ] Create milestone celebration animations

### Phase 3: Instructor Features (Weeks 7-9)
**Goal**: Build instructor dashboard and management tools

#### Week 7: Instructor Dashboard
- [ ] Create instructor layout and navigation
- [ ] Build student roster view
- [ ] Add cohort management interface
- [ ] Create progress overview charts
- [ ] Implement notification center
- [ ] Add quick actions menu

#### Week 8: Challenge Management
- [ ] Build challenge creation form
- [ ] Create WYSIWYG content editor
- [ ] Add question builder for quizzes
- [ ] Implement rubric designer
- [ ] Create challenge scheduling interface
- [ ] Add bulk import/export features

#### Week 9: Grading & Analytics
- [ ] Design submission review interface
- [ ] Create grading workflow
- [ ] Build feedback system
- [ ] Implement analytics dashboard
- [ ] Add report generation
- [ ] Create grade export functionality

### Phase 4: Polish & Deployment (Weeks 10-12)
**Goal**: Optimize, test, and deploy to production

#### Week 10: Optimization & Testing
- [ ] Implement code splitting
- [ ] Add lazy loading for routes
- [ ] Optimize bundle size
- [ ] Write unit tests
- [ ] Create integration tests
- [ ] Perform accessibility audit

#### Week 11: Mobile & PWA
- [ ] Ensure responsive design
- [ ] Add PWA configuration
- [ ] Implement offline support
- [ ] Add push notifications
- [ ] Test on various devices
- [ ] Optimize for touch interactions

#### Week 12: Deployment
- [ ] Set up CI/CD pipeline
- [ ] Configure production environment
- [ ] Deploy to staging server
- [ ] Perform security audit
- [ ] Launch beta version
- [ ] Monitor and fix issues

## 🎨 UI/UX Design Specifications

### Design Principles
1. **Mobile-First**: Design for phones, scale to tablets/desktop
2. **Gamified**: Visual rewards, progress indicators, achievements
3. **Accessible**: WCAG 2.1 AA compliance
4. **Intuitive**: Clear navigation, minimal learning curve
5. **Engaging**: Animations, interactions, visual feedback

### Color Palette
```css
:root {
  /* Primary - Electric Blue (Electrician) */
  --primary-main: #2196F3;
  --primary-light: #64B5F6;
  --primary-dark: #1976D2;
  
  /* Secondary - Tool Orange */
  --secondary-main: #FF6B35;
  --secondary-light: #FF8F65;
  --secondary-dark: #E55100;
  
  /* Success - Money Green */
  --success-main: #4CAF50;
  --success-light: #81C784;
  --success-dark: #388E3C;
  
  /* XP Gold */
  --xp-gold: #FFD700;
  --xp-gold-light: #FFEB3B;
  --xp-gold-dark: #FFC107;
  
  /* Grays */
  --gray-50: #FAFAFA;
  --gray-100: #F5F5F5;
  --gray-200: #EEEEEE;
  --gray-300: #E0E0E0;
  --gray-400: #BDBDBD;
  --gray-500: #9E9E9E;
  --gray-600: #757575;
  --gray-700: #616161;
  --gray-800: #424242;
  --gray-900: #212121;
}
```

### Typography
- **Headings**: Bebas Neue or Oswald (bold, industrial feel)
- **Body**: Open Sans or Roboto (clean, readable)
- **Numbers**: Roboto Mono (XP, scores, stats)

### Component Library

#### Core Components
1. **XPBar**: Animated progress bar with milestone markers
2. **BadgeCard**: 3D flip animation on hover/earn
3. **ChallengeCard**: Status indicator, deadline, XP reward
4. **LeaderboardRow**: Rank, avatar, name, XP, trend
5. **MilestoneTracker**: Checkbox list with progress percentage
6. **NotificationToast**: Slide-in with action buttons
7. **AchievementModal**: Confetti animation with badge/XP display

## 🔄 State Management Schema

```typescript
interface AppState {
  auth: {
    user: User | null;
    token: string | null;
    refreshToken: string | null;
    isAuthenticated: boolean;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  challenges: {
    list: Challenge[];
    current: Challenge | null;
    submissions: Submission[];
    filters: ChallengeFilters;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  progression: {
    xp: number;
    level: number;
    tier: ProgressTier;
    badges: Badge[];
    streaks: StreakData;
    nextTierXP: number;
  };
  leaderboard: {
    weekly: LeaderboardEntry[];
    allTime: LeaderboardEntry[];
    userRank: number;
    loading: boolean;
  };
  ui: {
    theme: 'light' | 'dark';
    sidebarOpen: boolean;
    notifications: Notification[];
    modals: ModalState;
  };
}
```

## 📱 Mobile App Strategy

### Phase 1: Progressive Web App (Immediate)
- Install prompt on mobile browsers
- Offline support with service workers
- Push notifications
- Home screen icon
- Full-screen mode

### Phase 2: React Native (Future)
- Shared business logic with web
- Native navigation
- Platform-specific features
- App store distribution

## 🧪 Testing Strategy

### Unit Testing
- Components: 80% coverage target
- Redux reducers: 100% coverage
- Utility functions: 100% coverage
- API services: Mocked responses

### Integration Testing
- User flows: Login → Challenge → Submit
- Instructor flows: Create → Grade → Analytics
- Payment flows: Upgrade → Access

### E2E Testing
- Critical paths with Cypress
- Cross-browser testing
- Mobile device testing
- Performance testing

## 🚀 Deployment Architecture

### Staging Environment
- **Frontend**: Vercel or Netlify
- **Backend**: Heroku free tier
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas M0 (free)
- **Storage**: AWS S3 (free tier)

### Production Environment
- **Frontend**: AWS CloudFront + S3
- **Backend**: AWS ECS or Heroku
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas M10+
- **Storage**: AWS S3 with CloudFront
- **Monitoring**: New Relic or DataDog

## 📊 Success Metrics

### Technical KPIs
- Page load time < 2 seconds
- Time to Interactive < 3 seconds
- Lighthouse score > 90
- 0 critical security vulnerabilities
- 99.9% uptime

### User Engagement KPIs
- Daily Active Users (DAU)
- Challenge completion rate > 70%
- Average session duration > 10 minutes
- User retention rate > 60% (30 days)
- NPS score > 50

## 💰 Budget Estimate

### Development Costs
- Frontend Development: 480 hours @ $100/hr = $48,000
- UI/UX Design: 120 hours @ $80/hr = $9,600
- Testing & QA: 80 hours @ $70/hr = $5,600
- **Total Development**: $63,200

### Infrastructure Costs (Monthly)
- Hosting: $200
- Database: $100
- Storage: $50
- CDN: $50
- Monitoring: $100
- **Total Monthly**: $500

## 🎯 Immediate Next Steps

1. **Set up frontend repository**
   ```bash
   npx create-vite@latest intrades-frontend --template react-ts
   cd intrades-frontend
   npm install @reduxjs/toolkit react-redux @mui/material
   ```

2. **Create project structure**
   ```
   src/
   ├── components/
   ├── features/
   ├── pages/
   ├── services/
   ├── store/
   ├── styles/
   └── utils/
   ```

3. **Configure API connection**
   - Set up environment variables
   - Create API service layer
   - Implement auth interceptor

4. **Build first feature**
   - Start with authentication
   - Test with backend API
   - Deploy to staging

## 📚 Resources & Documentation

- [React Documentation](https://react.dev)
- [Redux Toolkit](https://redux-toolkit.js.org)
- [Material-UI](https://mui.com)
- [Backend API Docs](/docs/API_DOCUMENTATION.md)
- [Figma Designs](https://figma.com/intrades-designs)
- [User Stories](/docs/USER_STORIES.md)

## ✅ Definition of Done

A feature is complete when:
1. Code is written and reviewed
2. Unit tests pass with >80% coverage
3. Integration tests pass
4. Accessibility audit passes
5. Responsive on all screen sizes
6. Documented in Storybook
7. Deployed to staging
8. Product owner approves

---

## 🚦 Ready to Start!

The backend is complete and deployed. The frontend development can begin immediately. This plan provides a clear roadmap to launch the InTrades platform within 12 weeks.

**First Priority**: Set up the frontend repository and build the authentication flow to connect with the existing backend API.
